Pellet sorter robot:

The pellet sorter robot is a double-jointed articulated tube designed for pellets to be distributed into a set of cups on a tray, with the aim of automating the output of the material production process:

Mixing of desired composition -> Extrusion -> Cooling -> Pelletizing -> SORTING -> Transport to sample manufacture & experimentation

The parts, designed in FreeCAD, are made mostly of PLA by 3D printing, together with 50mm diameter PVC pipe sections, and nuts and bolts for fastening. The robot, measuring 552x497x236mm, uses two stepper motors for positioning, one on its base and another closer to the end of the arm, allowing it to effectively sweep a truncated circular sector below the pelletizer that covers the entire area of a tray. A third stepper actuates the opening and closing of a butterfly valve. The whole assembly is suspended beneath the pelletizer by two arms on the top funnel/hopper, inserted into aluminum railings just under where the pellets exit. These make their way through the first joint, the valve (if open), and through the second joint, before reaching the nozzle and dropping into a cup or being discarded. The tray holding the cups is set up on a scale, which enables the control of fill levels of cups, as well as determining the material yield.

The motors are controled by A4988 drivers and an Arduino Uno R3 board, which is in turn managed by a Python script on a computer. The communication between these is established through a serial protocol, hence the Arduino must be plugged in by USB during operation, in addition to the power cable for the motors. The scale is also connected by its own serial port to the script. This Python code makes use of the Inverse Kinematics Python library (IKPy), through which the number of steps that each motor needs to take can be calculated in order for the robot to move its nozzle to a desired position. This versatility in the code, together with the fact that the arm should be able to reach any point within the swept region defined above, implies that the design is theoretically adaptable to any tray and cup arrangement, as long as these fit within said area.
